Oh.
NOTE CONF
Do you want me to speak now?
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
Go ahead.
All right.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
Hi, everyone.
NOTE CONF
Um, sorry to interrupt.
I just want to take a quick minute of your
NOTE CONF
time to tell you about a really exciting opportunity that
we have, which is to climb Kilimanjaro.
NOTE CONF
We're putting together a huge team from Edinburgh.
We've actually got quite a lot of people on board
NOTE CONF
already, but it will be great to have even more.
Um, I took part in this challenge last year and
NOTE CONF
it was actually the best thing I've ever done.
I could not recommend it any more.
NOTE CONF
Um, but it's a charity challenge.
So you fundraise in order to come on the climb.
NOTE CONF
Half the half of the money you raise covers your
climb costs, and half of the money goes towards Dig
NOTE CONF
Deep.
Dig deep are a small charity based in the south
NOTE CONF
west of Kenya.
They help to provide clean water, safe toilets and hygiene
NOTE CONF
education.
And in that area of the world, two out of
NOTE CONF
three people don't currently have access to clean water.
So really, really important cause.
NOTE CONF
But even more exciting opportunity for you on the climb
itself.
NOTE CONF
You go through four different ecosystems on your way to
the snow capped summit, which is also the tallest freestanding
NOTE CONF
mountain in the world.
And then after the climb, you have the opportunity to
NOTE CONF
see a bit more of Tanzania by going on safari.
Or you can go to Zanzibar to just relax after
NOTE CONF
all of your hard work.
If you would like to find out any more information,
NOTE CONF
you can scan the QR code on the screen behind
me.
NOTE CONF
And we're also hosting an information session tonight in 50
George Square Room Geo two.
NOTE CONF
It's going to be at 6 p.m..
We're going through all the details about the climb, the
NOTE CONF
charity, the fundraising and how we can support you with
your fundraising as well.
NOTE CONF
You also get a £100 discount by attending the session.
So if it is something you're interested in or you
NOTE CONF
know anyone who might be, please do come along at
6 p.m. to go to in 50 George Square.
NOTE CONF
Thanks very much.
Thank you.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Right.
NOTE CONF
Let's get this organised.
Ah, yesterday.
NOTE CONF
It didn't work on both screens.
Today it does.
NOTE CONF
She fixed something.
Yay!
NOTE CONF
Oh, okay.
Good afternoon, I'm Phillip Wadler.
NOTE CONF
I'm lecturing in place of dawn this week.
Uh, it's great to be back here.
NOTE CONF
I used to, uh, I created this course, actually, so
it's great to be able to teach it again.
NOTE CONF
So before I start, some of you were here yesterday
and heard me explain how important questions are.
NOTE CONF
Are there any questions?
And just so I can check, it looks like there
NOTE CONF
are more people here today.
How many people saw in yesterday's lecture and how many
NOTE CONF
people didn't see yesterday's lecture?
Okay, just a few of you.
NOTE CONF
So if you didn't see it, you'll be a little
bit confused.
NOTE CONF
And then you'll go, oh well, I can't ask a
question because I'm a little bit confused and I didn't
NOTE CONF
see it yesterday.
Just go ahead and ask questions, okay.
NOTE CONF
Right.
So we're talking about monads.
NOTE CONF
And yesterday we were talking about IO and monads.
So IO stands for input output.
NOTE CONF
And we learned how a monad lets you describe.
Right.
NOTE CONF
So put char you give it a character and it
returns a command something that's written io of unit type.
NOTE CONF
So right open closed parenthesis drunk.
It's just the unit type.
NOTE CONF
In Haskell it has only one value which is also
written open close parenthesis.
NOTE CONF
So it's quite useful to have sort of um uh,
trivial types like that in particular here instead of having
NOTE CONF
to make up a separate command, IO in general returns
a value the way we you can say we're not
NOTE CONF
interested in the value we returned by saying is it's
always of this type.
NOTE CONF
This type only has one value.
Nothing to see here.
NOTE CONF
No interesting information.
By the way, does anybody know what this unit type,
NOTE CONF
the type of no interesting information is called in the
C programming language.
NOTE CONF
Has anybody programmed in C?
Yes, some of you.
NOTE CONF
I was afraid of that.
Yes.
NOTE CONF
Some of you have been exposed to C.
And what is the unit type called in C when
NOTE CONF
you have a procedure that returns nothing of interest, what's
its type.
NOTE CONF
Void.
Right.
NOTE CONF
Except void sounds like empty whereas unit sounds like one.
In fact, this is the type with one value in
NOTE CONF
it.
It's the unit type.
NOTE CONF
Um, the empty type is a different type.
It has no values in it whatsoever.
NOTE CONF
And if you go on to fourth year and take
my class on Agda, you'll learn just how important the
NOTE CONF
empty type is, but that's a different type.
So C unfortunately makes things a bit confusing by calling
NOTE CONF
the unit type the void type.
It's not type with nothing in it, it's a type
NOTE CONF
with one thing in it, but that has no interesting
information because it's always the same thing.
NOTE CONF
Okay, so put char takes a charge and returns a
command.
NOTE CONF
So this is an IO of unit type.
And if you ever did that command it would print
NOTE CONF
an exclamation mark.
But the point is this is a pure value.
NOTE CONF
It stands for something that could, you know, it stands
for.
NOTE CONF
It's a set of instructions to follow, to do something,
but it doesn't follow the instructions.
NOTE CONF
It's just a set of instructions to follow.
And then this lets you put together two sets of
NOTE CONF
instructions to first do the, um, the first one and
then do the second one.
NOTE CONF
So if I say put your question mark, put char
exclamation mark, then that will write out two characters.
NOTE CONF
Done really does nothing and returns no interesting value.
And then we could write a string.
NOTE CONF
Right?
So you take a string.
NOTE CONF
If it's empty, you do nothing.
If it's head and tail xz then first you put
NOTE CONF
the character x and then recursively we apply put string
again to xz so it ends up printing out the
NOTE CONF
whole string.
So put string.
NOTE CONF
Question mark playing is the same as.
Put a question mark, put char exclamation mark and then
NOTE CONF
do nothing else.
Uh, we could also think of put string as just
NOTE CONF
folder with sequence and done uh, composed with map of
put char.
NOTE CONF
So the important thing is there are some laws that
are satisfied here Um, m followed by Don is just
NOTE CONF
em, right?
Do em and then do nothing is just do em.
NOTE CONF
Do nothing and then do em is just do em,
do em and then do n, and then do o
NOTE CONF
is just do em and then do n and then
do oh.
NOTE CONF
So you can put the parentheses either place.
And does anybody remember the name for a system that
NOTE CONF
has an operator and an identity that satisfy these three
laws?
NOTE CONF
Monoid.
Correct.
NOTE CONF
Sorry.
Uh, Boolean algebras have two of these in them, right?
NOTE CONF
One for conjunction and one for disjunction.
But a Boolean algebra is a much more sophisticated structure.
NOTE CONF
This is very simple, just one operator and one unit
satisfying these three laws.
NOTE CONF
And you'll have bumped into these because these are very
important for doing um just as here folder.
NOTE CONF
We often have folder and some boolean operator.
Some binary operator I'm sorry.
NOTE CONF
And then it's unit.
So that's a very common pattern which is why it's
NOTE CONF
worth knowing about monoids.
But the other reason it's worth knowing about monoids is
NOTE CONF
because monad is a pun on monoid.
So I've told you how to put together commands.
NOTE CONF
How do you actually execute a command?
And the answer is if we bind main.
NOTE CONF
So main is just another function in Haskell.
But by convention main always has type command.
NOTE CONF
And by convention when you run a program, whatever is
bound to main, that's what you do.
NOTE CONF
So I gave an example of this yesterday.
Oh that's not the one I want.
NOTE CONF
I gave an example of this yesterday.
If we say run GHC.
NOTE CONF
Well, let's look at the file.
Confused first.
NOTE CONF
But that just says print out an exclamation mark and
a question mark and an exclamation mark.
NOTE CONF
And then if I say, okay, run that program.
That's what it does.
NOTE CONF
It prints the question mark at an exclamation mark.
Didn't even print a new line after it.
NOTE CONF
It just had this funny prompt.
And the point is that we can then do exceptional
NOTE CONF
reasoning in languages with side effects like, see print!
Ha!
NOTE CONF
Print!
Ha goes ha ha!
NOTE CONF
But if you say let x be the value of
print ha in x, followed by x in only, this
NOTE CONF
does that as a side effect.
This does nothing at all, so you only get one.
NOTE CONF
Ha!
The laugh is on you.
NOTE CONF
So.
But in Haskell this does nothing.
NOTE CONF
It's just a command.
It's a list of instructions.
NOTE CONF
So saying let em be this list of instructions in
this new list of instructions M followed by m.
NOTE CONF
That's fine.
That works perfectly well.
NOTE CONF
So we don't need to worry about let doing something
funny.
NOTE CONF
It's just a set of instructions.
And then the next trick is instead of always writing
NOTE CONF
unit, we can write something else.
So I o of char is a command that reads
NOTE CONF
something from the input.
And returns.
NOTE CONF
Whatever it was, it read.
So this is a list of commands.
NOTE CONF
And whenever you execute the command, then it's going to
return a value.
NOTE CONF
So when we finally execute this command, if the input
is a b, c when we're done it's going to
NOTE CONF
return the value a.
And after we've done this it's done something.
NOTE CONF
So the remaining input has changed.
It's now BK we've read the A and B see
NOTE CONF
what is left to read.
Return does nothing except return the value that you give
NOTE CONF
it.
So return of empty list could have type I o
NOTE CONF
of string.
So in this case it's returning the empty string.
NOTE CONF
And if the input was BK it would yield the
value empty string.
NOTE CONF
And the input doesn't change it just b c.
So it does nothing except return a value.
NOTE CONF
And now we can combine commands.
So we first we do this command.
NOTE CONF
It does some stuff and it returns a value.
What are we going to do with that value.
NOTE CONF
We are going to pass it into another function.
This is a separate function.
NOTE CONF
It takes an argument of type A.
So we'll give it that one.
NOTE CONF
And then it does some stuff and returns the value
of type B.
NOTE CONF
And this final thing.
So what does this do.
NOTE CONF
So it returns the value this one returned.
But what does it do.
NOTE CONF
It does everything this one does and everything this one
does.
NOTE CONF
So it's combining two things.
So it's very similar to the operator we saw before.
NOTE CONF
But now it's threading a value through.
So for example if we say get char and then
NOTE CONF
apply this function lambda x put char to upper of
x so it gets the character a x gets bound
NOTE CONF
to a to upper of little a is big A,
and that writes a big A.
NOTE CONF
So when the input is a, b, c it produces
the output a and the remaining input is BC.
NOTE CONF
So in general right if m has type AOA and
k.
NOTE CONF
So this is actually a standard technique K stands for
continuation.
NOTE CONF
And quite often you write programs in what's called continuation
passing style where you have a function that says this
NOTE CONF
is what you do afterwards.
So k takes an a doesn't I of b, then
NOTE CONF
m followed by k will be an I o of
b.
NOTE CONF
And again this is just a recipe.
And what does it do if you ever do it.
NOTE CONF
It performs the command m.
But that will yield a value of type A which
NOTE CONF
we'll call x.
And then um it'll perform.
NOTE CONF
It'll Ill apply k to x that yield something of
type I of b.
NOTE CONF
So that's some instructions.
So it will do whatever the instructions say and return
NOTE CONF
a value y of type b.
And then when we're done we just return the final
NOTE CONF
value y.
So here's a program get line which says okay read
NOTE CONF
a character.
Put that in X.
NOTE CONF
If it's new line, stop, just return the empty string.
Otherwise recursively read the rest of the line again.
NOTE CONF
You'll stop whenever you finally see a new line.
Call that x as and return x cons xs.
NOTE CONF
So if the input was a b, c new line
def, it'll return the first line, the string a, b,
NOTE CONF
c, and the remaining input.
It'll eat up the new lines.
NOTE CONF
The remaining input will be d e f.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Any questions about that?
Especially from people who didn't see the slower Presentation yesterday.
NOTE CONF
People who didn't see the slower presentation can nod like,
okay, I follow that.
NOTE CONF
Anybody nodding okay.
So notice that right?
NOTE CONF
Return um and bind are related to the things we
saw before down in sequence.
NOTE CONF
Done is just return of again this unit type.
The thing that C calls void and sequence which just
NOTE CONF
combines two commands, is just m bind a function that
just ignores its argument.
NOTE CONF
Its argument is bound to be the value of this
type, and then goes off and does n.
NOTE CONF
So m followed by n can just be written as
a bind in this way, where you ignore the bound
NOTE CONF
value because it's always going to be of the unit
type.
NOTE CONF
So not very interesting.
Though as I described, the unit type is not very
NOTE CONF
interesting, but this is one of the interesting things that
I hope you'll learn from seeing all this, which is
NOTE CONF
that not very interesting types are very useful, but the
unit type lets us deal just with IE of an
NOTE CONF
arbitrary type.
We don't need to build make up something separate to
NOTE CONF
mean a command that doesn't return a value.
We can just have I o of unit as saying,
NOTE CONF
oh, this is a command and don't worry about the
value it returns.
NOTE CONF
It'll always be the same thing.
And the type the unit type.
NOTE CONF
Let's use the types to say whatever it returns.
We know what it is.
NOTE CONF
It will be the one value of the unit type.
So now we have this echo program which does get
NOTE CONF
line binds that to a line.
This is very similar to the hand we just saw.
NOTE CONF
If the line is empty then we'll stop and we'll
return the unit type.
NOTE CONF
So this thing eventually returns the unit type And otherwise
we will map to upper over the line.
NOTE CONF
So put the whole line in uppercase and then we
will print it out with a new line at the
NOTE CONF
end.
So we read a line.
NOTE CONF
Read the new line at the end.
Print the line.
NOTE CONF
Convert the line to uppercase.
Print the line.
NOTE CONF
Print a new line at the end.
And again I'll just show an example of this.
NOTE CONF
Oops.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
And now if I just hit New line, what's going
to happen.
NOTE CONF
Come on.
If I just hit new lines, what's going to happen?
NOTE CONF
The computer will explode.
Yes.
NOTE CONF
No.
We'll vote.
NOTE CONF
How many people think the computer will explode?
Three.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
How many people think the program will just terminate quietly?
NOTE CONF
Ah, it didn't explode.
How boring.
NOTE CONF
Okay, and then we have a special built in notation
in Haskell called do notation, where, just as a matter
NOTE CONF
of engineering the way our brains work, it's much easier
if you get the short name first and then get
NOTE CONF
the thing that has that short name, because then you
know what to call it.
NOTE CONF
Then if you give it a possibly long thing, saying
what to do, and then the short name to call
NOTE CONF
it by.
So the, uh, the way Haskell works, right?
NOTE CONF
We need a function here.
So the lambda has to come here.
NOTE CONF
So we just defined a special notation that says well
you write the name here and a backwards arrow.
NOTE CONF
And then the function, it looks a little bit like
what you do in the list comprehension.
NOTE CONF
Um, so this program and this one are just the
same.
NOTE CONF
So it says um do get char bind x to
the result, do get line bind XS to the result.
NOTE CONF
So that's what's written here.
And this is just a different way of writing the
NOTE CONF
same thing.
What's most important here is that due notation is written
NOTE CONF
with curly braces and with semicolons after each of the
command, which makes it look a bit like see, C
NOTE CONF
was the most popular language when Haskell was designed, so
it was helpful to make it look a little bit
NOTE CONF
like that.
But the key thing I said this yesterday, but I'll
NOTE CONF
repeat it now, is that because Haskell is a functional
language, because you can always bind variables with lambda expressions.
NOTE CONF
I could just define this.
I didn't need to get Will Partain, who was in
NOTE CONF
charge of the Haskell compiler, to add this special notation.
I could just write this and experiment with it.
NOTE CONF
So that's very important.
Haskell puts a lot of power at your fingertips.
NOTE CONF
That may not always be the most convenient notation, but
it will be a pretty convenient notation for writing things
NOTE CONF
out in.
So when you become a true programmer, what a true
NOTE CONF
programmer does is first they decide the the right language
for expressing their solution.
NOTE CONF
They implement that language, and then they express their solution
in that language.
NOTE CONF
That's really what programming is about.
And the real power of functional languages is they make
NOTE CONF
it very easy to define whatever language it is you
need.
NOTE CONF
So I was doing here with Return and Bind was
basically defining a language that's useful for expressing sets of
NOTE CONF
commands, sequences of commands, instructions to follow whatever you want.
Okay, so when you write do x one from e1,
NOTE CONF
x two from e2, e3, and so on, it really
means e1 bind lambda x one.
NOTE CONF
And then the body of the function is all the
rest of this e2 bind lambda x two and the
NOTE CONF
body is all the rest of this, and so on.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So we just went through what a monoid is right.
If you've got an operator um, oh plus and a
NOTE CONF
value you short for unit such that you is the
unit for oh plus.
NOTE CONF
So you plus x is x x plus you is
x and x plus y plus z is the same
NOTE CONF
no matter how you parentheses it.
Right.
NOTE CONF
There are lots of these around plus and zero times
and one or and false and and true concatenate and
NOTE CONF
the empty list.
And we saw another one sequence and done.
NOTE CONF
These are all examples of monoids.
Does anybody.
NOTE CONF
So this includes the two from Boolean algebra.
Does anybody else have a favourite example of a monoid?
NOTE CONF
No one.
How about matrix multiplication and the unit matrix?
NOTE CONF
Any others vector space?
Good.
NOTE CONF
Um, so you've got um vector addition in the vector
space.
NOTE CONF
And then the unit is the zero vector.
Right.
NOTE CONF
Very good.
So just lots of these things.
NOTE CONF
So a monad is actually very similar to a monoid.
Right.
NOTE CONF
We've got something like a unit which is return, and
we have a property like associativity, which is if I
NOTE CONF
do m bind the result to x and then do
n and bind the result to y and then do
NOTE CONF
O.
It doesn't really matter where I put the parentheses.
NOTE CONF
And if I return a value v and then bind
that to x and do m, then that's just like
NOTE CONF
lambda x m applied to v.
Or it's also like m with x replaced by v.
NOTE CONF
If I do m and then do lambda x return
x, which could also I could just write return there.
NOTE CONF
They mean the same thing.
Um, then that's just doing M right.
NOTE CONF
If I do m bind the result to x and
then return x, well, that's the same as if I
NOTE CONF
just did em.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So something satisfying.
These three laws is called a monad, and it doesn't
NOTE CONF
look like.
I mean, if you squint, these look very similar, but
NOTE CONF
clearly this is doing some extra stuff that this is
not doing.
NOTE CONF
But there's something called category theory.
And in category three it has such general definitions that
NOTE CONF
you can actually turn this one into an instance of
the definition in category theory of this one.
NOTE CONF
So this actually really is a monoid.
So the reason it's called monad is there's this branch
NOTE CONF
of mathematics called category theory.
Um it's quite general.
NOTE CONF
It's a very useful thing for computer scientists to know
because it's basically about taking different systems and how you
NOTE CONF
relate them.
So it's a generalisation of algebra.
NOTE CONF
In algebra you have different kinds of algebras and mappings
between them, which are called homomorphisms In categories.
NOTE CONF
You have things.
They might be algebras, they might be sets, they might
NOTE CONF
be other thingies.
They're just called objects.
NOTE CONF
And you have mappings between them which are called arrows.
And very pleased to tell you that the objects in
NOTE CONF
category theory have nothing whatsoever to do with object oriented
programming, but they are very useful for computing.
NOTE CONF
Um, and so if you want to go off and
study it, it's kind of useful.
NOTE CONF
But an example of this is that right?
You don't need any category theory to understand this.
NOTE CONF
I just explained it to you.
But the people who first discovered these notions were category
NOTE CONF
theorists.
So category theory was first developed in the 40s.
NOTE CONF
In the 50s, they found out that this structure was
quite useful for doing things in algebraic topology, which I
NOTE CONF
don't know, but this generalisation came out of it, of
having a bind operator and a return operator, which they
NOTE CONF
had different names for those.
But it's essentially just this idea.
NOTE CONF
And then Eugenio.
So the reason it's called a monad is it looks
NOTE CONF
a lot like a monoid, but the pun on that
monad is a term used by Leibnitz when he did
NOTE CONF
philosophy.
Um, so monads are something we use in computing all
NOTE CONF
the time to structure side effects.
Actually, when Leibniz was writing about monads, interestingly, he was
NOTE CONF
using them for abstract data types because we said about
monad is it has no windows through which you can
NOTE CONF
see it's inside.
So in other words, it's an abstraction where you can
NOTE CONF
understand it from the outside.
But how it works on the inside is immaterial.
NOTE CONF
And the most famous sentence you will find in Leibniz
says God is a monad.
NOTE CONF
So the category theorist, it was called category theory after
Kant's categorical imperative.
NOTE CONF
They just, um, sort of decided as a convention everything
they named, they would give it a name from philosophy.
NOTE CONF
So this this actually has three parts to it.
Um, one is the name of the thing that builds
NOTE CONF
the type.
So for us that's been fixed at IO, but we'll
NOTE CONF
see.
It can be an arbitrary, um, type constructor.
NOTE CONF
So the arbitrary constructor, the thing that squishes things together,
which is bind, and the thing that just pushes something
NOTE CONF
into, uh, into this type, which is called return.
So it was also called a triple, but that's a
NOTE CONF
very boring name.
Calling them triples when they have three components.
NOTE CONF
It's sort of like calling something, hey, you.
So monad was a much better name because it had
NOTE CONF
some substance to it.
And um, it alluded to things in category theory.
NOTE CONF
Sorry eluded to things in philosophy.
Let's get this right.
NOTE CONF
So I've meant so.
I've just shown you the one monad that's built in
NOTE CONF
to Haskell, which we use for doing stuff.
But in fact, why says what a, um, what?
NOTE CONF
Any programming language is most useful for designing your own
language and then using that to solve your problem.
NOTE CONF
So I'm going to show you now how are we
doing for time?
NOTE CONF
Two instances of doing that.
So in general we have um, an arbitrary constructor.
NOTE CONF
So here is how monads are defined in Haskell as
a type class that defines a type class.
NOTE CONF
So we can always reuse the names return and greater
than greater than equal which I'll pronounce bind.
NOTE CONF
um.
But in general, you just say monad of m.
NOTE CONF
M is an arbitrary type constructor.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Return takes a value of type A for any type
A and returns an m of A.
NOTE CONF
So before it.
So before m was I o.
NOTE CONF
So this returned an I o of a.
In general it's just an m of a.
NOTE CONF
And similarly bind takes an m of a and an
a to m of B and returns an m of
NOTE CONF
B.
Example lists form a monad.
NOTE CONF
So here open.
Close is used not to mean the empty list, but
NOTE CONF
to mean the list type.
Right.
NOTE CONF
So open close applies to a is what we write.
Open bracket A closed bracket.
NOTE CONF
The type lists of a.
So return takes an A and gives you a list
NOTE CONF
of a.
Okay I know a function that does that return of
NOTE CONF
x returns the list with one thing in it, which
is x.
NOTE CONF
The return takes a value into a list of that
value and bind.
NOTE CONF
Hmm.
So bind takes a list of a right because it's
NOTE CONF
in M of that B list of A and a
function from A to m of b, so that would
NOTE CONF
be from A to list of b and returns a
list of b.
NOTE CONF
How would I do that.
Okay so m now stands for list k is a
NOTE CONF
function that given an element of that list, returns another
whole list.
NOTE CONF
So this M is a list of type a k
takes an A and returns a list of type b.
NOTE CONF
So what does bind do here?
Well, if I wrote it as a list comprehension that
NOTE CONF
would be take x from m, draw x from m,
and then for each x and m, let y be
NOTE CONF
drawn from k of X and then return that list
of y.
NOTE CONF
Notice that this is just equivalent to the following recursive
definition.
NOTE CONF
Empty list bind k is just empty list.
X cons x is bind k is.
NOTE CONF
Apply k to x.
That will give us a list of b.
NOTE CONF
Um.
Take x and bind k on it.
NOTE CONF
That will give us a list of b.
We've got two lists of B and we just append
NOTE CONF
them.
Or another way of writing this is m bind k
NOTE CONF
is just map k over m.
So now we've got a list of list of b
NOTE CONF
and we concat.
So that collapses that down to a list of b.
NOTE CONF
And in fact when I was first applying monads I
wasn't doing it for side effects.
NOTE CONF
I was doing it for this.
To understand what's going on with list comprehensions, I realised
NOTE CONF
that monads were exactly gave you just enough stuff to
define a list comprehension and set of do notation, we
NOTE CONF
have what's not in Haskell anymore.
Monad comprehensions where this instead of a list could be
NOTE CONF
an arbitrary monad do notation turned out to be a
little bit easier for people to use.
NOTE CONF
And again, when I first did it, I didn't have
that notation available.
NOTE CONF
So I just wrote things out in this way or
this way.
NOTE CONF
Again, I could just define it for myself because Haskell's
that powerful.
NOTE CONF
So it doesn't always give you the exact syntax you
want, but can give you the exact concept that you
NOTE CONF
want.
Um, so in fact, do notation and comprehensions are very
NOTE CONF
similar.
So here let's form all pairs where the first component
NOTE CONF
is less than the second.
So that would be all pairs I j where I
NOTE CONF
is drawn from the list one to n j is
drawn from the list I plus one up to n.
NOTE CONF
Right.
So if we think about pairs of four is going
NOTE CONF
to be one two, 1314 and then 2324 and then
three fourths all pairs where the first component is strictly
NOTE CONF
less than the second component.
Um, but a different way of defining that is I
NOTE CONF
could use the list monad and use do notation.
I could say do I drawn from one to n
NOTE CONF
j drawn from I plus one up to n, and
then return ij.
NOTE CONF
So very important thing about um bind in monads, about
guards, in list comprehensions and about do notation is the
NOTE CONF
thing that you bind in the first one can be
used in the second one.
NOTE CONF
So the way we get that in, um.
The way we get that out of bind is because
NOTE CONF
the second thing pass to bind is a function.
It can use the value returned by the first one.
NOTE CONF
So this idea that whatever you do in the first
one can be referred to in the second one is
NOTE CONF
one reason why monads are so powerful.
So you see.
NOTE CONF
Right.
So here I've done for a particular list comprehension.
NOTE CONF
But you could see that you could always change a
list comprehension into do notation, just each drawn from turns
NOTE CONF
into a bind.
And then the thing at the beginning turns into return
NOTE CONF
of that thing.
So bind bind bind bind bind bind return Return to
NOTE CONF
value.
Bind.
NOTE CONF
Return.
And this is right here I and J makes use
NOTE CONF
of things bound here to the right of it.
Here we read from left strictly from left to right.
NOTE CONF
So we only use things have been bound earlier.
So that's slightly easier from an engineering point of view.
NOTE CONF
No question yet.
Come on somebody ask a question.
NOTE CONF
If you don't ask a question I'm going to have
to show you how parsers work.
NOTE CONF
Right.
Do people want to see.
NOTE CONF
Yes.
Where's the function.
NOTE CONF
Now?
Where is the function in in here.
NOTE CONF
So I just speak a little louder because you're far
away.
NOTE CONF
Ah right.
So here this is going to turn into use of
NOTE CONF
bind.
So what function is it?
NOTE CONF
So the answer is it's the function lambda I followed
by du of all of this okay.
NOTE CONF
And it went by pretty quickly.
But that's exactly what's written here.
NOTE CONF
So when we write x drawn from e1 that means
e1 bind lambda x1.
NOTE CONF
And then the translation of all the rest of that.
Right.
NOTE CONF
Good question.
Excellent.
NOTE CONF
Any other questions?
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
How do parsers work.
All right.
NOTE CONF
So now we've got the monad of lists.
Oh I need to show you one other thing before
NOTE CONF
I show you parsers, which is there's some other things
that you often find in a monad.
NOTE CONF
So you often find a monad with a plus.
So, um, these things form a monoid right?
NOTE CONF
M0 is the unit m plus is the O plus.
So M0 is just an m of A for arbitrary.
NOTE CONF
A m plus takes two mas and gives us an
Ma.
NOTE CONF
And again um lists form a monad plus where m0
is the empty list and m plus is concatenate.
NOTE CONF
And the important.
The important thing is that for any monad with plus
NOTE CONF
we can then define guard.
So guard takes a bool and returns an m of
NOTE CONF
the unit type again.
So it only has a side effect.
NOTE CONF
It doesn't return an interesting value.
What we do is guard a false is M0 guard
NOTE CONF
of trues.
Do nothing, just return the one thing you can return.
NOTE CONF
We could also find m some, which takes a list
of ma to an ma, and does that by doing
NOTE CONF
a folder with m plus and m0.
And one special case.
NOTE CONF
Now.
Um, so guards are very useful because they let you
NOTE CONF
put conditions right.
This generalises the notion of a guard from a list
NOTE CONF
comprehension to an arbitrary monad.
So now we could put a guard in there.
NOTE CONF
So now I'm doing something like before, except just a
different way of writing the same thing I drawn from
NOTE CONF
one to n j, drawn from one to n, and
have the condition that I should be less than j.
NOTE CONF
So we would write that as I drawn from one
to n j drawn from one to n guard I
NOTE CONF
less than j, and then return I j.
So this maps down to this, this maps down to
NOTE CONF
this.
And again this is going to return, uh, all pairs
NOTE CONF
where the first component is less than the second component.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Now I can answer your question.
So a parser of type A, basically what we want
NOTE CONF
to do is take a string and return a value
of type A.
NOTE CONF
And for the top level that's fine.
But if you think about it, when we're parsing something
NOTE CONF
as we go through parsing, it will parse the first
bit.
NOTE CONF
So we'll read some of the input and there'll be
some input left.
NOTE CONF
And then we'll parse the second bit.
So we'll read that bit of input and there'll be
NOTE CONF
some input left and so on.
So you might think of it as something that okay
NOTE CONF
we give it the input, we return the value that
we parsed and whatever bit of the input we did
NOTE CONF
not read yet.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So this I have defined a side effect within Haskell
itself.
NOTE CONF
So just using pure Haskell, no notion of side effect.
This is my input string.
NOTE CONF
This is the remainder of the input string after I've
read some of it.
NOTE CONF
In general you can simulate arbitrary state in this way.
So one kind of monad which I won't go into
NOTE CONF
today is the state monad, which lets you pass around
an arbitrary data type as state.
NOTE CONF
Your state can be whatever you want.
If you're playing, um, checkers it the state might be
NOTE CONF
what's on the checkerboard currently.
Right.
NOTE CONF
But we've learned about everything in terms of pure functions.
Right.
NOTE CONF
In the world.
Right.
NOTE CONF
You can the state is that this is in this
place on the desk.
NOTE CONF
I can pick it up and put it on that
place on the desk.
NOTE CONF
So for modelling the real world, having some notion of
state can be useful.
NOTE CONF
This is how you do it.
Input state whatever value you want to compute paired with
NOTE CONF
the output state.
So Haskell is powerful enough that you can build into
NOTE CONF
it modelling arbitrary states.
So our state is going to be the bit of
NOTE CONF
the string we haven't read yet, except for one thing.
Parser doesn't always work, does it?
NOTE CONF
And sometimes we've got arbitrary parses, and we're going to
try them and pick the one that works.
NOTE CONF
So we need to have some way of saying this
parse didn't work.
NOTE CONF
Or even for an ambiguous string.
There might be multiple ways of parsing it.
NOTE CONF
So we might want to say here are three possible
parses.
NOTE CONF
So it's very important to be able to say no
parses.
NOTE CONF
It did not work.
Or to be able to say, well actually it worked
NOTE CONF
really well.
Here are three different parses.
NOTE CONF
Pick the one you like.
So what we're going to do instead of just take
NOTE CONF
returning a value and the new state will take the
input state and return pairs of the value we passed
NOTE CONF
and the remaining state.
And there will be a list of these things.
NOTE CONF
And just as Haskell is powerful enough to model the
notion of state.
NOTE CONF
This shows us that Haskell is powerful enough to model
the notion of nondeterminism.
NOTE CONF
We're going to do a kind of angelic nondeterminism.
But you learned about non-deterministic state machines.
NOTE CONF
This is how we modelled it, by having a list
of results and the remaining, um, parsed, um, string going
NOTE CONF
into the automaton.
So we did exactly this before for nondeterministic automata.
NOTE CONF
See, we take a string and we'll return a list
of parse string pairs.
NOTE CONF
And my colleague Graham Hutton turned this into a little
poem.
NOTE CONF
A parser for things is a function from strings to
lists of pairs of things and strings, not Doctor Zeus.
NOTE CONF
Graham Houghton.
Um, so we're going to find a module.
NOTE CONF
We want parser to be an abstract type.
So I just defined a data type a parser of
NOTE CONF
a.
This is a type constructor also named parser.
NOTE CONF
Right.
And just as the fourth string goes to the list
NOTE CONF
of a string pairs.
And then to apply a parser, we take a parser
NOTE CONF
of f and s and we just write apply f
to s, and we get this list of a string
NOTE CONF
pairs.
Um, and in particular what parse is going to do.
NOTE CONF
Um, this is what you do for a successful parse.
It applies the thing gets the list, checks that we've
NOTE CONF
parsed the whole thing, and then returns the head of
the list.
NOTE CONF
So this succeeds if you parse the whole thing.
And there is exactly one parse.
NOTE CONF
So if you parse the whole input and was unambiguous,
parse will return the result.
NOTE CONF
So now we need to return, define return and bind.
So return as a parser that takes the um un
NOTE CONF
parsed input and returns the value x and all the
UN parsed inputs so it doesn't change the state at
NOTE CONF
all.
And m followed by k is.
NOTE CONF
Take the current state, apply M to S, so that'll
give us a list of XT pairs.
NOTE CONF
So x is our values.
We apply k to x and then we apply that
NOTE CONF
to t the new state.
So original state we get a value and a new
NOTE CONF
state apply k to k of x gives us our
new parser.
NOTE CONF
Apply that in state T, get out.
Finally, state u and return the final value of y
NOTE CONF
and the final state U.
And it's also very helpful to have a monad plus
NOTE CONF
right?
M0 is the parser that always fails.
NOTE CONF
Right.
Return is the parser that always succeeds.
NOTE CONF
M0 is the parts of the always fails, and plus
is parse m parse n combine the results.
NOTE CONF
This is very important because if this one fails, it'll
give you this one.
NOTE CONF
If this one fails, it will give you this one.
So you have two passes and you want two passes
NOTE CONF
that you might want to apply.
It lets you choose.
NOTE CONF
So just parse a given one character is very easy
right?
NOTE CONF
You'll be given your state is C followed by S,
and just return um the value c paired with the
NOTE CONF
remaining state's.
So we take the first character off of the input
NOTE CONF
state.
Um, return that as our as our value, and the
NOTE CONF
output state is just the remaining string.
And then spot takes a predicate over characters and it's
NOTE CONF
going to succeed if the character we read satisfies that
predicate.
NOTE CONF
So this is just like this.
If the list is empty, fail here.
NOTE CONF
Also, if the list is empty, fail if it's non-empty
and p of C holds, then return the key pair
NOTE CONF
and otherwise fail.
And then token says read a particular character.
NOTE CONF
That's just spot for equal c.
So like if I want to read an open bracket,
NOTE CONF
that would just be token open closed.
Um quote open parentheses which is spot of equal of
NOTE CONF
open parenthesis.
And then matching an entire given string more than one
NOTE CONF
character would just be.
Well the first one must be x.
NOTE CONF
The remainder much match XS and then we return that.
And notice that when we do a token, the character
NOTE CONF
we return is the one that we had to have
read.
NOTE CONF
And now we can do interesting things like parse um,
zero or more things.
NOTE CONF
So if plus is one or more things than we
do plus of p m plus return empty.
NOTE CONF
So it might return one or more things, or it
might be returned to the empty list.
NOTE CONF
It parsed nothing at all.
And then plus of P is going to be read
NOTE CONF
a p, read zero or more things and return the
list formed by concatenating those together.
NOTE CONF
So now I can do interesting stuff like how do
I parse the natural number?
NOTE CONF
It's just plus of spot of is digit Right.
One or more digits is going to be a natural.
NOTE CONF
And let's just see that at work.
So this defines all the different things that we just
NOTE CONF
saw.
And so now I could do.
NOTE CONF
Apply of plus of is digit.
To 123.
NOTE CONF
A b c d e.
What.
NOTE CONF
Number expect.
Oh, I'm not running in Haskell.
NOTE CONF
Maybe I should run in Haskell.
That might be better.
NOTE CONF
Uh oh.
It's broken.
NOTE CONF
Ah, I know what's wrong.
That's okay.
NOTE CONF
We're at time.
No demo for you.
NOTE CONF
That's okay.
Um, but this would, if given the string one, two,
NOTE CONF
three a, b c, we return a list of a
pair in the first element that the pair is the
NOTE CONF
number one is the string one, two, three, and the
remainder would be a b, c.
NOTE CONF
And we could generalise that to do expressions right.
So an expression is either a literal or sum of
NOTE CONF
two expressions or product of two expressions.
If I want to parse those, I just do parse
NOTE CONF
the literal m plus, right?
Do one or the other.
NOTE CONF
Parsing a sum or partial multiplication and literal is just
passing an integer, and add is read an open parenthesis.
NOTE CONF
Pass an expression, read a plus.
Parse an expression.
NOTE CONF
Read a close parenthesis.
Return d plus e.
NOTE CONF
Using our constructor for expressions and model is very similar.
Read an open parenthesis.
NOTE CONF
Read an expression.
Read a times.
NOTE CONF
Read another expression.
Read a closed parenthesis and return d times e.
NOTE CONF
So you've seen we can build very powerful languages within
Haskell.
NOTE CONF
Here's a language for describing parsers.
And for example if you do parsecs of one two,
NOTE CONF
three give you one plus two.
Sorry one plus two times three gives you one plus
NOTE CONF
two times three.
Right.
NOTE CONF
There's a paper somebody wrote once called A brief, Incomplete
and Mostly Wrong History of Programming Languages, where he poked
NOTE CONF
fun at lots of programming language developers.
One of them was me.
NOTE CONF
So among all these different entries.
One of them said.
NOTE CONF
So he's got Alonzo Church and Lambda Calculus and Alan
Turing and so on.
NOTE CONF
And this one, in 1990, a committee formed by Simon
Peyton Jones, Paul Hudak, Philip Wadler, Ashton Kutcher and people
NOTE CONF
for the Ethical Treatment of Animals, four of those are
correct.
NOTE CONF
Um, creates Haskell.
Uh oh.
NOTE CONF
Three of those are correct.
He left out John Hughes.
NOTE CONF
How could he leave out John Hughes?
All right.
NOTE CONF
Um, creates Haskell a pure, non strict functional language.
Haskell, get some resistance due to the complexity of using
NOTE CONF
monads to control side effects, Wadler tries to appease critics
by explaining that quote A monad is a monoid in
NOTE CONF
the category of endo functors.
What's the problem?
NOTE CONF
I will stop there.
Thank you.
NOTE CONF
So I will also be giving the guest lecture next
Monday on propositions as types.
NOTE CONF
That's a fairly famous talk, so I hope to see
you there.
NOTE CONF
Hi.
Thank you very much.
NOTE CONF
Oh, thanks.
So you ask the question now.
NOTE CONF
Does anybody else do any other functional languages?
And, um.
NOTE CONF
Oh.